coming up next is the science fiction radio show so stay with us
this is the science fiction radio show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
and here are your hosts
this is daryl lane and david carson ray bradbury is a name familiar not to just
readers of science fiction or fantasy but to almost any literate american or
european some of bradbury's work like the martian chronicles or fahrenheit 451
are classics that are admired by readers of all kinds and of all tastes he does
indeed write science fiction and fantasy and horror and weird stories but
they're all done with a style and emotional texture that is unique to bradbury
bradbury wrote from a very early age as far back as his grammar school days in
the midwest but it wasn't until he was 19 and living in los angeles that he got
the push that helped him to get published he tells us about a group of science
fiction writers in los angeles that gave him that push bruce yurkey who was the
secretary for the science fantasy society wrote me a letter in october of 1937
that was my last year in high school and invited me to come down to clifton's
cafeteria and meet the group and i was very shy and a little fearful i didn't
know anyone but nevertheless i got my courage together and went down to a
meeting and that was my first encounter with forrest ackerman who became my
first editor he was editing a magazine called imagination and then along over
the next year or so i met henry kupner arthur barnes lee brackett robert
heinlein jack williamson ross rocklin henry hassey uh they all became friends
and in one way or another influenced me we were very close and i was beginning
to write a lot of very bad science fiction very bad fantasy i still haven't
learned to write well but these people were very patient with me and uh
especially i remember robert heinlein and his uh wonderful wife who invited me
up to their home on occasion i got to read a lot of his manuscripts before they
were published he was just starting to write uh he came to a meeting at the um
science fantasy club uh in i believe it was 19 early 30 38 or 39 he had just
written his first story and sold it to astounding science fiction so he was a
beginner just as i was except he was about 11 years older he was around i would
say 31 and i think i was 19 when i met him so it was that kind of situation
where you had uh personal contact with writers who were already established or
were establishing themselves and of course it changed my life forever because i
had acceptance uh people were willing to put up with me and read my terrible
stories though bradbury did get encouragement from these other writers his
fiction has always been uniquely his own we asked him if it would be fair to
call him a self-taught writer well i guess you can say that uh most writing
almost every art form is self-teaching except what you need around the edges is
shortcuts if people can help you by recommending certain books either books on
writing or books which give you examples of excellent writing i remember henry
cuttner was always calling lee bracket up or calling me up and saying hey have
you read catherine app and porter do you know the work of john collier what
about eudora welty well this kind of uh shortcut is so important that you break
away from your own field and move on out into the the wide culture and bring
back into the science fiction and the fantasy field influences from people like
kipling or somerset maulme or john collier so that's where having a good teacher
is important uh not that they teach you all that much or that intensely but the
fact that they care about you at all is very good for your sense of malnutrition
we all feel as if we haven't fed ourselves well enough when we're that age we'll
continue our conversation with ray bradbury next time
this has been the science fiction radio show a production of the permian basin
science fiction association produced in conjunction with odessa college in
odessa texas biz sheist
so
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Ray Bradbury is an internationally known
author who's managed to attract readers outside the field of science fiction and
fantasy. In fact, he's one of the few writers of science fiction and fantasy
whose name is almost instantly recognizable outside the field. He's also written
so-called mainstream, a regular fiction ever since he began publishing early in
the 1940s. Dandelion Wine, a poetic novel about a boy growing up in a small
Midwestern town, is one example of his non-science fiction output. We asked him
how he broke out of the restricted field of science fiction and gained such
widespread acceptance for all of his fiction with all types of readers. Well,
you just automatically think about it for a lifetime. I always dreamt of being,
number one, a writer, not a writer of science fiction or a writer of fantasy,
but a writer, period. I had huge heroes that I looked up to in the world, people
like Shakespeare and a lot of the great poets, Emily Dickinson and Robert Frost
when I was in my teens. And then as I got older and began to see the world of
the theater around me more, I wanted to do theater work. I loved motion
pictures. I knew that eventually I wanted to do some films. So my interests were
always very Catholic, very broad, and it was only a matter of time before I
would experiment with each of these things. And at the same time I was writing
and having my first success of selling stories to weird tales, I was beginning
to write short stories in the larger fields. Stories about racial relationships
or stories about travel inside America, a little bit of everything I was
experimenting with. Bradbury said he was about 25 when he first began publishing
stories that were not science fiction or fantasy. A friend of mine called me on
the phone, said he was going to Mexico to travel for two months. Did I want to
come along? Well, I said, I can't. I don't have any money. I was still only
making around $20 a week selling stories to weird tales. I usually sold six
stories to weird tales every year, which gave me around $120 for the whole year.
And then I sold an occasional murder mystery and a few science fiction stories.
So my income at the time was around $2,500 a year if I was lucky. And he said,
oh, you're such a coward. He said, here, the war is over. War has been over in
Europe a month or so. You should travel. And you're afraid to send out your
short stories. You're afraid of being rejected. I know you've got a lot of
excellent, broad, literary, middle stream fictions. I actually retype them and
send them out. So by God, he egged me on. And I got three short stories out of
my files. I retyped them, put an assumed name on each one, William Elliott. I
mailed them off without an agent, without any representation, with not even a
letter from myself to the editors. And one story to Charm, one story to
Mademoiselle, and another one to Collier's. Bradbury got a big surprise and a
big paycheck after sending those three stories in. Well, all three stories sold
within three days of each other. One story sold on August 19th to Charm. On the
20th, one to Mademoiselle. And on my birthday, the 22nd of August, I sold my
first short story to Collier's. So all of a sudden, I had an aggregate of $1
,000, which arrived in the mail. Well, $1,000 back in 1945 would be like getting
$15,000 in the mail today. I was out of my head. I couldn't believe it. So with
that money, I picked up and went to Mexico with him for six weeks, where I had a
whole series of adventures that scared the hell out of me and caused me to write
some of my best weird stories when I came home. So that's the way I made the
transition, because someone called me a coward and dared me to send my stories
out. On our next show, we'll have more with Ray Bradbury.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas. .
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us. . . . .
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. . Ray Bradbury's The Martian Chronicles is
one of the best-known science fiction books produced in this country. Its poetic
style, its treatment of mankind's present problems, and its vision of man's
future make it a book admired not only by regular readers of science fiction,
but by anyone who reads it all. . The book is really a collection of related
short stories concerning man's colonization of Mars. We asked Bradbury if he
wrote each story with the entire volume in mind. .
. . I went to New York City in June of 1949. My wife was pregnant with our first
child. We had about $80 in the bank. And I took the Greyhound bus to New York,
and I took all my short stories with me.
. . . . . Well, I had meetings with various people at Simon & Schuster and
Doubleday, and they all said, . .
. of hanging them all together. It seems to me there's a common thread. I said,
oh my God. You know, years ago I made notes about doing a series of chronicles
and then threw the notes somewhere and forgot about them. So my subconscious
must have remembered and along through the years was putting these beads on a
single thread. I went back to the YMCA that night, sat in my underwear. It was a
hot, hot summer evening, terribly humid, and finished typing out an outline of a
book which I called The Martian Chronicles, which I then took to Doubleday the
next day and they promptly bought the novel plus the illustrated man, a
collection of stories. And I left New York City with, again, a fabulous $1,000,
$500 for each book. The stories are not scientifically accurate. Man can breathe
the Martian atmosphere unaided, for example, but they're not meant to be. They
have to be read symbolically. At a deep, unconscious level which is triggered by
Bradbury's poetic way of writing. There is an order to the 26 stories that make
up The Martian Chronicles. The final one is entitled The Million Year Picnic and
we asked Bradbury why he put that one last. It seemed a proper place to put it.
It seemed a culmination of all the stories and that my job in looking at all my
stories was to guess where to place each. And while some of them it was very
easy, I did a whole series of stories of first encounters on Mars with various
expeditions. So I knew those automatically had to be up front along with an
imaginary encounter in Illa where a woman dreams an invasion of Mars. We never
see the invasion itself of the Earth men, but we know that secretly it must be
there somewhere and that real people got killed by the jealous husband. And then
you go along through all the other encounters and what happens to Mars as a
result of the invasion by Earth people. And ending with all of your final beats
and a brief return to Earth for there will come soft rains and then the million
-year picnic at the end. It all fell together in roughly two hours in my head at
the typewriter that night at the YMCA. In 1980, NBC produced a major six-hour
dramatization of the Martian Chronicles. We asked Bradbury if he was happy with
it. I most certainly was not. It was one of the most boring shows ever put on
television. And it's a great shame. Obviously, no one enjoyed doing it. And the
director obviously didn't enjoy it, which is a great shame because he should
have got out of bed every morning and said, let's have a ball, let's play, let's
jump up and down and scream and yell and get something out of this material. But
he obviously didn't do that. We'll have more with Ray Bradbury on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
We'll see you next time.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Ray Bradbury's 1962 novel, Something
Wicked This Way Comes, is a classic of fantasy and horror. It's about a carnival
that comes to a small midwestern town, a carnival with evil secrets beneath its
colorful exterior, and about two boys who discover the evil. We asked Bradbury
if there was a particular impetus behind the story. Not really. It all started a
long time ago. I wrote a short story for Weird Tales called The Black Ferris.
And I've always been in love with carnivals and circuses and illustrated men and
dwarves and pygmies and you name it. So over the years, all this material
accumulated. And one night about 24 years ago, Gene Kelly invited me over to MGM
Studios here to see a new film of his called Invitation to the Dance. And part
of that film is a sort of dance ballet concerned with a clown, a carnival, sort
of material that Lon Chaney Sr. once did 60 years ago in American films. He did
a lot of films about circuses and armless,
legless performers, all kinds of grotesques that he worked with and pretended to
imitate. So I came out of the screening of Gene Kelly's film and walked home
with my wife, lamenting all the way the fact that I'd never worked for Kelly and
wanting very much to do so. So I got home and I rummaged through all my material
to find something to send to Gene Kelly. And I found The Black Ferris. And I
took several weeks to write it into a longer 70-page screen adaptation treatment
outline. And I took it to Kelly and he immediately said, my God, I must direct
this. Can I have an option on it? I'll take it to Europe and try to get some
money. He went to Europe for a number of weeks and months and finally returned
and said, it's no use. Nobody wants to put up any money for this. Thanks very
much and so long. Well, I was heartbroken because I wanted to work for Kelly and
I said, to heck with it. I sat down and I wrote the long screen treatment into a
novel. Took me about two years. And the novel was published in the late summer
of 1962, 20 years ago. The novel is a good example of Bradbury's beautifully
poetic style. It uses images of autumn and the gaudy colors of a carnival to
convey hidden menace and evil. The carnival rides, for instance, do strange
things to people. And the sideshow freaks and grotesques have unnatural
horrifying powers. Bradbury often uses carnival material as a symbol of evil. We
asked him why. I think most of us are uncomfortable around carnivals and
circuses. We sense that the people who run them are evil people. There is
something wrong with most carnival people. The workers, it's a very tough life.
It's a rough existence. And it's run by a bunch of tramps and vagabonds and
people who go from town to town. They have no roots. And I should imagine
there's a lot that goes on behind the scenes we can't even guess at. Not that
there isn't a hierarchy there. In a big circus, of course, there is. And the
people at the top of the hierarchy are the trapeze people. They are the royal
family. And then you go downwards through the various levels of performers,
depending on their athletic prowess. But it's a very difficult life. And it's a
miracle if most of these people make it through and keep their sanity. So when
you're a child, you sense, especially in the seedy little carnivals that come to
visit your hometown, you sense the uneasiness, the sly life, the sense of evil
behind the scenes in these people. I suppose that's where my fictions came from.
Something Wicked This Way Comes is being made into a major motion picture by
Disney Studios and should be out at the end of the year. We'll continue next
time with the works of Ray Bradbury.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show,
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. One of Ray Bradbury's classic novels is
Fahrenheit 451. It's a chilling picture of a future society in which books are
outlawed and humans are weakened by addiction to a totally electronic society. A
person who possesses a book is subject to severe punishment, and there's even a
government institution composed of firemen whose job it is to seek out all books
and burn them. We asked Bradbury if there was a particular episode or
inspiration behind Fahrenheit 451. It was a combination of things. I had gotten
interested with book burners over a period of time, and when I wrote the book,
it was the beginning of the McCarthy era, the Joseph McCarthy period, when there
was a lot of talk about books being banned. Not many of them got banned, thank
God. For a brief moment there, I think they took a few American books off of
foreign library shelves in army libraries, and then President Eisenhower ordered
them all put back on, which proved what a bright man he was, thank goodness. But
it was during that period that I suppose my subconscious fermented on all this
and said I've got to do a book about my anger about libraries, because libraries
is really the place where I was born and raised myself, grew up, and have lived
for a lifetime. They really are very super special to me. And I go in bookstores
constantly. I can't stay away from them. I buy too many books. I'm compulsive
about it. So the novel wrote itself in nine days. I went up to UCLA in 19...
This was back in 1950. And I spent nine days there in the typing room in the
basement of the UCLA library with about 12 students sitting around me. And I
played these dime-a-half-hour typewriter machines. And I typed the novel on
those dime machines. And I spent around $9.40 typing the novel. So it's a grand
place to write a book like that, isn't it, in the basement of a library.
Bradbury seems to be pointing out the dangers of a technological society in the
novel. And some of his other work, like The Martian Chronicles, has some of the
same warnings. We asked him if his work is anti-technological. Well, that's a
misinterpretation. It's never been true. I've never mistrusted technologies.
Only people. There's a big difference there. It's the way we use the automobile,
for instance. There's nothing wrong with cars that having more safe drivers
won't change. Now, when it comes to computers, space travel, IBM's electric
typewriters, these are all beautiful. We're using them well. And the future is
very exciting because of it. Now, I've tried to pick those technologies that I
criticized. For instance, there was a certain moment in history in Los Angeles
where they were threatening to put Muzak with advertising on our buses. And I
immediately mounted a campaign with some friends, thousands of people, who said,
oh, no, you don't. It's bad enough we have all these posters all over the place.
But to trap us on buses and then make us listen to music we don't want to hear
or advertisements we don't want to hear. So I'm anti the way that particular
technology was going to be used. We asked Bradbury if he thought there was any
danger of book burning or censorship today. We hear those rumors every year. And
there are always some stupid librarians or some stupid mayor or some dumb
pressure group in some town somewhere in our country every year for the last 60
years that wants to censor this or censor that. And then they blow away. They're
just chaff in the wind. And don't pay any attention to them. And if they grow
giant size, call me on the phone and I'll come over and kick them in the
kishkas. Okay? Yeah.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
and then we'll
have the Browns' the Abyss wedding
and visions that are as as Thank you.